Today is June 20, 1974. We'll be interviewing Dr.
James D. Lindsey, former head of the chemical
engineering department.
Dr. Lindsey, if you would, would you tell us when
and where you were born? August the 24th, 1899, in
Jamaica, Long Island, Jamaica, New York.
Queensborough. Queensborough. Could you tell us
a little bit about your family, your father's
name, your mother's name, and how your father was
employed? Well, my father was a sailor aboard a
sailing ship. When he left home, his mother
remarried, and he was kind of forced out of the
home, and he went as a cabin boy of the old days of the
sailing ships and did quite a bit of sailing. Then
he came ashore.
and got a job packing boxes in the shipping
department. He was in that. Where was this? In New
York City. New York City. And what was his full
name? James McCrossin Lindsey. And your mother's
name? Ida Augusta Tucker was her maiden name.
Lindsey was her last name. Can you tell us? She grew
up in New York, Brooklyn, New York. Tell us a little
bit about your boyhood days in New York. Well, it
was a country town when I was there.
One of the boys' radio was just coming in, and there
was an older boy around the neighborhood that was
interested, and he built his own radio receiving
set, and I got so I could read the code, and that is
the call signals. I couldn't read when they got
going fast in the code signal. But it was just a
small town, country town. It's grown up into large
apartments around. I had a sister that
was one of the wanderers of the family. went up to
the North Coast, North Cape, and she got to be a
school teacher. And she taught down the Panama
Canal, and she taught up in a hospital up in New York
State. She was a physical education teacher, and
she got in giving remedial physical education to
people who needed it. She went all over the world on
her vacations and also some jobs. She and I, I had an
older brother that died many when I was just a young
boy, appendicitis. Didn't know much about
appendicitis in those days. And so we grew up and
I've lost track of most of the people. There's one
boy that We bought a second-hand canoe and kept it
down in Jamaica Bay, close to one of the present
airports.
We sailed around Long Island. In a canoe? Yeah,
there's a string of, just like down in Padre
Island, there's a string of islands along the
ocean shore, and then you've got the Long Island
Sound on the inside. So it's... It's an inland
waterway. It's an inland waterway, yeah. That
sounds like a fascinating experience. Well, it's
entertaining at least. And he is the only boy that I
keep up with up there in Jamaica. Are there any
experiences that really stand out in your mind in
your boyhood that might be interesting, anything
that happened that you remember or recall?
We used to go coasting about Washington's
birthday. There was a very fine go almost for about
a mile. There was a hill, there's a ridge of hills
along the backbone of Long Island. And there was
quite a hill in the back of our house. And climb up to
the top of it. Anybody ski in those? No. No skiing?
No, no skiing. It was way back on a hill back of us,
and they had a very fine band, and every evening
about 6 or 7 o'clock, they'd get out and parade with
that band just to keep in practice, and we used to
hear that coming over there. So that area was
really pretty much small-town America at the
time. Right. This is right. Could you tell us a
little bit about your education? Well, as my
father was not an educated man, so when I finished
high school, I
didn't have any trend towards further education.
And I went to work for a pharmaceutical company
called Pfizer, Charles Pfizer, Inc. And as a lab
boy, washing the dirty beakers in the lab and
sweeping the floor and the like. When was this that
you went to work for Pfizer?
Well, it must have been right around 1918. I'm not
too certain. See, I finished high school. I go up
with the years. Right up with the close of World War
I and without. Yeah, I guess so. See, each year,
most of the year, I'm on the same date as the year. 74
in August, I get to be 75. I can place things that way
when things happen. So I think I went to work for
Pfizer about 1918. Was that a large company then?
No, no. It was quite a small company. Very small.
Very small. And I had a very fine boss. What was his
name? James Nimrod Curry. Very fine. Dr. Curry,
he's retired now in Vermont. He must be about 96, 97
years old. And he was like a father to me. And the
only man I know that has hair growing on the palms of
his hands He got a burn with bad, with phosphorus,
very bad burn. Phosphorus, white phosphorus is
bad. Tissue scars started growing together and
they grafted on his stomach down on three sides and
folded it down and then sewed it on three sides and
kept it there for two weeks and then cut it off on the
fourth side. And the hair from his stomach still
grows on the palm of his hand. And he's, we've kept
in touch. Well, he was the one that urged me to go to
school, go to night school, and I went to night
school for a couple of years. Where was this that
you went to? Columbia University. Columbia.
Night school. And he saw I could do that. I was a
willing worker, and he saw I could do that. And then
the next thing he urged me to do was to go to a regular
day college rather than night school because you
can only take one course at night and it would be so
much quicker to work it out in a day college. And
because the middle western schools were so much
cheaper than those in the east, quote one of my
friends, I went way out west to Michigan. Anything
across the Hudson River is out west to the New York
people. That's his advice. Let me interrupt you
here and get back to something that I want to ask.
Well, I don't want to take all the time. No, no, no,
this is fine. We've got plenty of time. The
question I wanted to get back to is we skipped over
your elementary and on up to high school
education. Jamaica High School. Jamaica High
School. Jamaica High School. And consider you've
got to a fairly good background there? I think so. A
good one? I think so.
Are there any particular people that stand out
from those years that might have been
inspirational in your life? Well, there was a man
by the name of Reynolds who was He used to coach the
rifle team, and that's how I got to know him. Not
that I was a real rifle expert, but he was a fine
gentleman, and he was the one that urged me to try
and do something first to get into a job, help me get
this job over there at Pfizer's and the like. He was
always trying to keep the boys going towards
higher education and the like. How long did you
work for Pfizer? Well,
they were very, very fine to me. They were very
fine. And after I went to regular school at
Michigan, they had a job for me every summer
vacation. How did you get out to Michigan? Why
there? Why did you go there? Why there? Because I
didn't know a soul, didn't know anything. I'd
never traveled. We'd never traveled. And
Michigan was a good school. Oh, yes. That's what,
on Dr. Curry's recommendation. Oh, now he
recommended you. Yeah, we talked it over and I sent
away and got a lot of catalogs. I had a bunch of
catalogs from all over. And it was basically on Dr.
Curry's recommendation. And what year did you
start Michigan?
Must have been about 1920. 1920? Yeah, I finished
in And you'd already had a few courses. A few
courses. It's helped out quite a bit. Freshman
chemistry and some of those things helped out
quite a bit. And then you went on to the University
of Michigan majoring in? First originally
towards chemistry. Got a B.S. in chemistry.
I worked for Pfizer's every summer, and they
really wanted me to go back to work for them. They
really wanted me to go to work on a permanent basis.
And I hated to turn them down, but I'd gotten the
smell of fresh air. See, when I worked for
Pfizer's, I'd get in the subway, go up to Columbia,
come on down on the subway, transfer to It was an
elevated railroad at that time, right back out to
Jamaica on the elevated railroad. And I'd done
that for about three years, I guess. Had three
courses, three or four courses off. Well, two
years it was, 1918, 1920.
And I just didn't... I got the smell of the fresh air
out there at Michigan and made some very good
friends out there. In fact, one was the best man at
my warden and another one... I don't usually tell
this. He and I, the only time I've ever been in jail
was with that old boy. Don't put any of that in my
memory. His father was a ticket agent. in a very
small town
in Michigan. And I visited there. One of the
Thanksgiving or some vacations, I'd visit there.
His name was Dempsey. We called him Jack because
the real Jack Dempsey was just coming along then.
Wilmer Foster Dempsey. His name was Wilmer?
W-I-L-M-E-R, Wilmer. A family name, Wilmer
Foster. And
so he
was going with a girl out there in Ann
Arbor.
Happened to be a nurse. They had a nurse's training
school there. Can't you get a date for a friend of
mine? So he got a date from me, blind date, and she
was a nurse. And I went with her, but I didn't make
out too well, a few dances and things like that and
the like. And I went to then this fellow, Roy
Wilson, who was another very good friend of mine.
His mother kept a rooming house. She was a widow and
kept a rooming house there.
We both went to work for the Standard Oil of Indiana
in Whitey, Indiana, south of Chicago, about 30 or
40 miles south of Chicago. Was this after you
graduated? After I got the B.S. degree in chemical
engineering.
Well, in pure chemistry. Then...
I had a Model T Ford, and so about once a month or so,
we'd go back and visit his mother, see his mother
back in Ann Arbor, about 200 miles as I remember it.
Just by chance at all, walking down the street, I
met this nurse who I'd had a few dates with, And it
started all up again. And that's the girl that I
married.
So chance has played a very important part in my
life. That's really amazing. Well,
we got married.
I decided that I wanted to get some more education
instead of a BS degree. I wanted to get into
teaching, basically. I wanted to get into
teaching instead of working in industry. You were
still working for Standard Oil? Standard Oil of
Indiana. And
so looking around, if you want to get into
teaching, go back and get an advanced degree. And
that's what governed my going back to school. And
when did you go back? About 1930. 1930. So you
worked for Standard Oil for a while. Well,
one of my good friends, I went to work for a couple of
years with the Kelvinator Corporation in
Detroit. That was when they were manufacturing
refrigerators. And he had such a much better job
than
the Standard Oil Company that I went to work for. It
was about two years with Standard and about two
years with... What did you do with Standard Oil?
What was your duties and responsibilities?
Well, first kind of a breaking in period in the
laboratory, you know, and all that various tests
and the like, and then working out in the plant, in
the manufacturing plant. Elias in between the...
the plant operators and the technical people
inside. Was this research or quality control?
Well, seeing that they were doing the right thing
out in the plant, basically. They changed the
temperature and operating pressure. In the early
days, it was straight distillation. Shell
stills, just a bunch of tanks. went to Berkshire
and had a bill to fire on any of these tanks. Didn't
have catalytic crackers in those days. Oh, no,
they had none. In fact, they didn't have any
fractionation, where you'd get the different
grades from the crude oil because it had a string of
eight of these horizontal tanks. in the first tank
where you'd boil off the lighter stuff and pass it
on to the next one and you'd boil off the heavier
stuff and by the time you got to the last tank you had
heavy rigid and each tank you'd condense so it was a
heavier material quite a lengthy process oh yeah
then they got And that was just exactly, that was
just the time when these fractionating towers
came in, what they call a pipe still, where you have
a big furnace, several times bigger than this
room, pipes around the wall of the furnace, and
just had a big gas or oil fire inside, and you look
inside, the whole thing was hot, and yet that would
heat these, the piping would pick up the heat, Then
you'd bring it to a distillation column and go into
it and have trays. And it would vaporize and you'd
have reflux. And on each tray, you'd get the
lightest stuff off the top and the heaviest stuff
off the bottom. Instead of having a series of these
steel tanks, great big steel tanks, 20 feet in
diameter, we're taking a little fraction off.
you'd vaporize there, you'd put it in to this
column, which may be 30 feet in diameter and maybe
40 feet high, 50 feet high, and you'd have trays in
each one where the vapor would go up through caps,
bubble caps, and the liquid, you'd put reflux down
the top, and the liquid would come down from the
top, And the heavy residue would come out the
bottom, and the overhead, light overhead, would
come out the top. And at different points in this
tray, you'd take off cuts. Instead of having a big,
long series of great big tanks taking off the cuts,
you'd take off cuts up and down this column. When
did this system come in? That system came in... Oh,
about 1922, 23. I went there in 24. And they had it
there. And they were just starting. Just
starting. In fact, they started up one of the
biggest. They started up a pipe still for the first
time when I was there that first year. Where was the
location of this refinery? Whiting, Indiana.
It's about 40 miles south of Chicago.
Then you went to Kelvinator. What were your duties
at Kelvinator? watching manufacturing
operations and doing research. You did research.
Could you tell us a little bit about the research?
Oh, primarily corrosion resistance, just
finding some of the best materials. This is for the
cooling unit? Right. Yeah, that's right. And
anything come out of this research that you did?
No. Nothing in particular? No, just pick the best
materials that would stand out about it. What were
they using at that time? Steel, but different
alloy steel would be better.
Oh, my friend, Larry Phillips, went up and just did
fine in that organization. He got to be on their
board of directors, and he just did fine in
Kelvinator. And then you went back to school after
Kelvinator. And I went back to school about 1930.
And where was this, back at Michigan? Michigan,
back at Michigan. And when did you receive your...
In 1934. You received your Ph.D. Ph.D., so you got
your master's degree when? In between, right in
there. And I converted to chemical engineering
rather than pure chemistry. I see. Was this
probably because of your industrial experience?
Yeah, that's right. I made heavy water for a job.
Have you heard of heavy water? Yes, I have, in
conjunction with atomic experiments. Well, you
can...
One of my former, well, he was a teacher there, and
when I went back to school, he was looking for
somebody to come and help him work on a research
project for making heavy water. If you pass
electricity through water,
the heavy water, the heavy hydrogen will break up
easier than the light hydrogen. So he made a bunch
of electrolytic cells And it was my job just to keep
the water level as you ran 24 hours a day. And so I
kept that. And where was this? At Michigan? Yeah,
Ann Arbor and Ann Arbor. He was an organic chemist.
And you see, you can make materials out of
hydrogen. You know what an organic chemist, like
methane is CH4. And you use heavy hydrogen instead
of light. ordinary hydrogen, why those materials
you make will have different properties than the
other, the light hydrogen and so
on. And
we've kept in touch with him, that man that was
doing the research under whom I was working,
making that heavy hydrogen for. So
then... I finished there in 1934 and there were no,
that's when we had a big depression. There weren't
any teaching jobs and
so I took a job doing research on fertilizer.
Muscle Shoals originally had been a munitions
plant in Alabama.
They converted that to a fertilizer plant. It was
just having to do with nitrates. Right.
Phosphates, to phosphates primarily. But
nitrates and phosphates. So I went down there to
eat on, really. And my boss knew I was looking for a
teaching job when I went down there. He came to me a
year later, are you still interested in teaching?
And I said, yes. So he said, well, a friend of mine is
dean of engineering out in Idaho, and he's looking
for a chemical engineering teacher. And if you
want it, you can have it. So I said, I'll take it. So
then I really did go out way out west, as one of my
friends said when I went to Michigan and taught
there for a couple of years. in Idaho, University
of Moscow, Idaho. Yes. Is that Idaho State or
University of Idaho? University of Idaho. And
we have what's known as the American Society of
Engineering Education, which is engineering
teachers all over the country.
Most engineering would go to these meetings. They
usually, it's a cheap, I mean, they hold it at some
college. It's not a drinking national meeting
like a good many of these national meetings are.
It's a hard working bunch.
So, I went to North Carolina State. It's like a
slave market. In other words, people are looking.
So I went to North Carolina State for one year. At
the same time, I was talking to these people, but
North Carolina State came through first. I
accepted that in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Two years, I have been very, very lucky in this deal
here. Two years as assistant professor at the
University of Idaho, Moscow. one year as
associate professor at North Carolina State.
Came to Texas A&M as a full professor in a combined
chemistry and chemical engineering department.
Three years as a full professor is not bad, is it?
You're right. Well, just wait for another couple
of years. It was in a combined chemistry and
chemical engineering department, and the dean of
engineering was trying to get it spread. It was in
the School of Arts and Science, and I didn't
realize what I was getting into, but there was a
battle going on between the dean of engineering
and the School of Arts and Science whether they
should separate engineering into the School of
Engineering or whether they should keep it in
there. And, boy, once I found out what was going on,
I walked a straight and narrow path. And then
another year after that, I got to be made head of the
department. Okay, let's back up a minute before we
get into that, before we jump into it. Now, you
spent a year at the University of North Carolina?
One year, right. Then you came to A&M. How did you go
about getting to A&M? Well, at the same time, I was
talking to North Carolina. That's one of these
ASEE slave market deals. I was talking with the
Texas A&M. Who were you talking to? As I remember,
it was a Mr. Gilchrist. I think he was the one that
actually hired me. He was the one that actually
hired me. Now, it was a cockeyed operational
because he hired me, but I was in the School of Arts
and Science in the literary school. And did you
decide to come to A&M? Did they offer you a more
attractive position? All of it was a boost in rank
and a boost in pay.
And this was toward the end of the Depression now.
This is 37? 38. 38. This is
right at the tail end of the Depression. Yeah, I
think so. And traditionally, this is the way
chemical engineering Originally, to go into the
history of this stuff, originally
they used to teach industrial chemistry in the
School of Arts and Science. How you made sulfuric
acid and just a descriptive discussion of how you
made various materials. And then The MIT people
came out with a new idea, which
they wrote a book called Unit Operations.
And here it studied different kinds of heat
transfer. Well, the first one is fluid flow.
Pressure drops through a pipe, whether you're
pumping oil or whether you're pumping water or
whatever. The same fundamentals will apply
regardless of what you're pumping. The same thing
is true in heat transfer. If you're heating
something up, the same fundamentals would apply
whether you're heating oil or whether you're
heating water. And that same idea was taken into
all kinds of so-called unit operations, fluid
flow, heat transfer, distillation, the
fundamentals of what you are doing, rather than
the descriptive of how to make sulfuric acid. And
that idea was brand new in chemical engineering,
in teaching. Instead of a descriptive course, it
was a how to do it course. And that started MIT and,
of course, the northern schools, Wisconsin.
Those schools picked it up and put it in, in
chemical engineering. But it took quite a while
for the country boy schools, and I don't mean that
he... No. It took quite a while for that idea to get
out to the smaller schools. It's really kind of
unusual, because here you had a school that was
supposedly teaching the how-to-do of various
things. It was originally planned. had
agriculture teaching people how to do it. It's
unusual. Well, there wasn't anybody had written a
book on this so-called unit operations book put
out by the MIT people. It was brand new. About 1920,
that book came out. Then you came here now in the
fall of 38. Fall of 38, as a full professor. Right.
With full teaching load? Yeah, I think so. Well, a
little bit of time supposed to be for research, but
not very much in those days. And at that time, I
believe, T.O. Walton was president. Right.
That's right. C.C. Hedges was head of the
chemistry department. C.C. Hedges. Cut the
Well, Mr.
Gilchrist, who was Dean of Engineering, wanted to
get the chemical engineering taught in the School
of Engineering under him, rather than in the
School of Arts and Science.
So he approached me, would I be willing? And once I
told him I'd be willing, but I couldn't take any
sides in the matter. And he understood that. And so
they used to have a board of directors meeting to
graduate, legally graduate the students. And
then they'd have a reception for the parents after
the graduation. And all the staff used to go to that
reception to meet the parents of the students. So
Mr. Gilchrist beckoned me over. You're going to be
working for me this summer. So the same board of
directors that had graduated the students, they
had decided to separate the department. So he sort
of rammed it through the board of directors. Oh
yes, he was for that all the time. Do you think he had
any opposition to forming a chemical engineering
department? Oh yes, the old boy Hedges, Professor
C.C. Hedges, didn't want to let it go. He didn't
want to lose his chemical engineering section.
That's right. It's only normal, I suppose. And
then this was what, 39 and 40? No, about 41, I think.
41. I think it was about 41. And Mr.
Gilchrist, the old,
had the old geology building. I don't know whether
it's... They taught petroleum in it for a long
time. That one used to have a tower on it. Used to
have a water tank in it. Right, right, a water tank
inside of that tower, right. And so he said, we'll
put you over there this summer, but it won't be long
before we have a regular chemical engineering
building for you. About two or three years it'll
take to get us separated. And that was from about 41
to about three or four years ago when they built
this new engineering building up on the corner,
maybe five years ago. So we were in that old geology
building for many years. And then they built a...
Every time somebody moved out, I'd get my foot in
the door to get a few extra rooms. They built a very
nice... It used to be petroleum, too, in there.
Chemical engineering has to do with the
distilling of the oil. The petroleum engineering
has to do hunting the oil, finding the oil, and
getting it up out of the ground and transporting it
through their pipelines. And then chemical
engineers take over at a refinery and have to do
with the separation of the products. When was the
department accredited? Do you remember? Say, no,
I don't. I'd have to, it was, we went through a long,
hard series of troubles in getting us accredited.
First was, there's a lot of things, getting the
equipment and getting enough staff and I don't
recall. I'd have to look it up. Let's drop back a
minute now. We've got up into the 40s. When you
first came here, do you have any impressions of,
say, President Walton? He was here until 1943.
Well, I thought he was a very good president. Did
you have any personal relationship with him at
all? Oh. Did you ever get called into his office to
talk to him?
I sure did. Harrington, too.
One of the things that I inherited was cotton seed.
They do a lot of cotton seed, growing cotton here
and making cotton seed oil and chicken feed out of
what's left after you squeeze So that was going on
when I came, but I inherited a lot of that. And so we
had this short course in cottonseed oil. And it
wasn't too large. About 80 and 90 people would come
to it. Is it in the summertime? Usually, yes. And
then...
So
we'd had that. I'd had that experience with that
cottonseed short course. Then I started a, well,
I'd take our students out on inspection trips. And
things had changed so much since I was a boy in a
refinery, why they had automatic recording
instruments and control instruments. If you
wanted to change a valve or read a gauge, you'd have
to climb a steel ladder to read it and twist the
valve yourself. Whereas I'd come down here quite a
few years later, and they had recording
instruments and control. You didn't have to do all
of that. You had a little house, a regular house,
where they had these recording instruments in.
And so I thought we should teach some of that. And I
didn't know anything about automatic control or
the like. And I wrote to a bunch of companies that
made these instruments, asking for their
catalogs and information. And one afternoon, a
chap showed up in my office. from one of these big
companies and said, we've had requests for
information from all kinds of people, but we never
had a request from a college professor. What did
you want to know for? So I told him what I had in mind
of teaching that stuff in our classes, and he
thought that was a very fine idea and agreed to work
with me. And then he said, well, it sure would be
good if we could get some of these older people
acquainted with the operations of these
instruments, as well as your new students just
coming through. So having been associated with
this oilseed course, I said, well, maybe we can do
that, too. And so we started an instrumentation
short course. And it was very, very elementary at
the start. We'd meet in the classrooms. have the
exhibits in the halls of the building, and it has
developed very, very fine. That's still going on?
It's still going on. And the new student center in
1950, when we had the student center built, why,
that was a big help. And we get about 600, 700 people
attend it now, and they come from all over the
country. It was the first one that got started,
even before there's an Instruments Society of
America that got started now. Do you remember the
year you held your first meeting? Oh, I think I'd
have to look this up, too, about 41, 42. I
can get all of this factual material. And...
So it's mighty fine. I've made mighty fine friends
in that organization. Well, where I got to know
these presidents a little bit more,
as you know, a lot of these guys from industry like
to have a drink. And there's a lot of salesmen
around. And they're selling the instruments. And
the people from the big companies will be using the
instruments.
And so I got called down to the president's
office. They found five bottles, whiskey
bottles, in
your
wastebaskets in the room. What room is this? In the
student center here on the campus. And there's not
supposed to be any... What president was this in
the country? Well, I think it was Walton was the
first one, and it was just when Harrington was
taken over. And Harrington was a teacher in the
chemistry department. Well, let's see. Walton
was here until 1943, and then Bolton until 1944,
and then Gib Gilchrist until 1948, and Bolton
again, and then Harrington the first time in 1950.
Yeah. Well, anyway, every little while this thing
would happen.
So I had gotten called down there. I know
Harrington, he sure didn't want to do it because he
lived down the street from me before he got to be
president. But he had to do it. And when I got told
that they found him in the wastebaskets of the
room, I put out the word. If any time you guys empty a
bottle here on the campus, why, put it in your
suitcase and take it home with you. And I never had
any trouble from then on.
So that's how I originally got to... I mean, I got
called down to the president's office a couple of
times. One was real bad.
There was one... over in the board of directors
house. And one of the guys really got intoxicated
over in the board. You don't remember our old
student center across the street from the,
remember when they crossed the street from the
mess hall? right next to the old president's
house. This used to be the Aggieland Inn?
Aggieland Inn, yeah. I've seen pictures. It was
torn down right as I— Yeah. Well, anyway, several
years ago. Well,
they used to have displays in there. It was quite
elementary. But it's—we've changed things up and
hold them now at the end of the semester. Well,
digress a little bit here.
What do you remember of the end of the Depression
here on the campus? Was there many hardships from
the teaching faculty? Did
anybody know there was a Depression going on here?
I don't remember too much about that. Was it an
island of relative prosperity in a country that
was having hard times? We had a harder time to get
jobs for the students. I worked very closely with
the students in getting jobs. That was something
that I was always... good relations with the
students. In fact, the matter is, they gave me an
automobile when I retired. Yes, I know.
Well, anyway,
working hard, that was the hardest thing, is
getting jobs for the students.
But I don't recall that we had
trouble. See, I was here and our staff was pretty
well fixed.